Remember when you were in school
and you often did a lot better in courses
where you were really organized with your notebook,
legible notes, handouts, textbooks,
and additional materials, remember that?
This is what I want us to do when it comes
to organizing our tax and money documents.
I just want you to be really, really organized.
And I know it might seem a little bit silly
to be this organized with tax documents,
but I promise you, later on when you come back
and look at these documents, and I promise you,
you'll need to come back to it eventually,
you'll feel much more comfortable
with your financial situation.
Kind of like when you study for a final exam,
and you go back and look at your notes
from the semester or the term or whatever,
you do much better if you're much more organized.
Okay, so most people are really, really disorganized
when it comes to their money and taxes.
And I used to be like this.
And so I developed a system for you to use if you want.
It actually involves printing out this attached pdf, okay.
And it's included, this pdf here in PowerPoint
as well as in pdf format, okay.
I've included it in this lesson as an attachment
in case you want to customize it.
And the name of the document is called annual tax filing
and it looks like this here.
And you can also get this on the Excel tab
if you scroll down, you'll see the name of this file
and you can click on it, if you're not getting it
from within the course.
Okay great.
If you want, just go to exercise 13
in your Excel dashboard called Exercise 13 Tax Organizer,
if you're not already there.
And you can choose to use that form I just showed you
in Exercise 13 and click on the check boxes
or you can actually do the paper version.
So you can fill this out in Excel right here if you want to,
click on the x in the boxes there,
type over where you want to hard code in
titles of your savings accounts, et cetera,
and then hit the print button or print Save As pdf.
I set this tab up so when you hit print,
it's just that one page there
which again looks like this here, okay.
Your call.
Now I wanna give you a bunch of options to do
what makes most sense to you.
Now before I explain how to use this one page snapshot
of your finances, I recommend buying the following items.
And I'll include the Amazon links for a couple
of these items as well.
So the first thing I want you to do
is I want you to buy one of these things, okay.
And you can actually write the year on the side
so eventually you have every single year done.
And this is called an accordion file,
'cause it looks like an accordion.
When you open it up it has predefined names for you
like insurance, finances, bills, your car, bank,
whatever it is, right.
You can fill in these files this way if you want to,
but I got a better way for you.
Give me a second and I'll show you, okay.
So there's a couple of examples here.
And the one that I think is probably best
is the cheapest one, and I love shopping on Amazon,
because they have something called Amazon Basics,
which means cheap stuff that works.
And so this item here is their version of their accordion.
And this is five bucks, five or six bucks.
And there's the link right there.
And so basically it expands and it's everything
you really need to manage your finances.
There's tabs and all that fun stuff as well, okay.
And so I'll give you a couple more examples
in a second here, okay.
And what you can do is
you can actually, you can throw in every monthly expense
document that you have.
And what I like to do is this.
I'll show you.
I like to actually create the monthlies ones like this.
See January, February,
March, and these are just envelopes
and you can kind of put them in here, whatever.
And if you have, you can use this for multiple years
by buying these green tabs or colored tabs,
just paste them over each year,
kind of like on your license plate
the little registration thing, right.
And then I get bigger ones sometimes for education.
You can tell my writing's awful,
insurance, house expenses, et cetera.
For medical, whatever it might be.
And just kind of categorize everything.
And so, let me just drill down a little bit more detail
on how we're gonna go through this, okay.
Buy one of these per year, okay,
and you can create your own tabs, if you wanted to
and print them out, but I kind of like just writing
on the side of it here.
And I recommend actually gluing, see here,
gluing that form I spoke about here
to the back of each back, each year.
And what you can do is you can check off each item
as you put the items in there.
Again, you can customize that one-pager here, okay.
You can do that by opening up the PowerPoint version
of the document, and I also saved it in pdf format
so you can just download it, whatever,
or just do the Excel version and hit print
and then stick it on the box.
So let's go through this.
So, at the top here,
you've got a bunch of, you got,
first of all, enter the year.
Then you've got your monthly bank statements.
So enter in your savings, your checkings,
and then just check off each month as you put them in here.
Okay, each account you get in the mail.
And I included a couple additional ones there
if you wanted to add you own other accounts.
And so as you get these bank statements in the mail,
you're gonna put them in the box and then check the box
to say that it's actually there.
And if you have electronic versions,
what you can do is you can just write the word
or the letter E inside these little boxes
instead of checking it.
And so once all the boxes have been checked for the year,
then you check on complete.
And I apologize, my handwriting is just awful.
But do that for each category, okay.
So, this will save you a lot of aggravation, time, and money
around tax season, I promise you.
And future years as well,
if you ever have to go back and look at older documents
or other money accounts.
I promise you, you will need to come back
and look at many documents in this accordion in the future
for each year, like if you, I don't know,
if you wanna buy a house or you wanna buy a car,
or what your address was in the past
when you rented a place.
And the next category here moving down, okay,
is 12 monthly receipt envelopes.
And these receipt envelopes, heavy, big, or small ones,
and I like to use these ones here,
which I buy from Office Depot and not online, okay.
Whoops.
See how disorganized I am.
Okay.
And so when you put each one of those envelopes in here,
right, then you're just gonna check in this box,
okay, once there all here in this accordion.
And after you accumulate receipts, just put them all
in those envelopes on a monthly basis
and then what you can do is you put them back
in the box here and check the box.
And once all 12 monthly receipts envelopes are
in the accordion, then just check
off this complete item here, see complete,
okay, on the top right hand corner.
Okay, good.
The next section down, this third section here,
okay, is for investment or retirement accounts,
if you have them.
And so again, just check off the monthly boxes here
as you receive your account statements in the mail
and put them in here, okay.
This'll save you a lot of aggravation, I promise you.
It will save you a lot of money as well in the long run.
Let's keep moving down here, okay.
Let's go on to the monthly mortgage or housing statements.
And I own one house, I don't own two,
some people have a cottage or whatever,
a summer home, you can put that there as well, if you want.
You can collect all your property tax documents as well
and just throw them in each envelope as well
or within this box somewhere.
And what happens is right here, this red shaded area
is really important, it's the tax section, okay.
And I made this red as you absolutely have to have
these documents in here,
and these are just your tax documents
like your W-2 Form in the U.S. your K-1, 1099,
or whatever it might be.
And if you don't have the forms at least one or two months
before taxes are due from your employer
or from anyone that hired you over the past year,
or from companies that are supposed to send them to you,
then call them right away, please.
It's really important.
You can't file taxes without those documents.
And if you hired an accountant,
your accountant will keep bothering you for this and say,
where's your W-2, where's your, send it over,
that sort of thing, okay.
Tax forms have different names in different places
as I mentioned before, it's called a W-2
which is your salary tax form you get
if you work for somebody, that sort of thing.
And if you worked as a consultant, it's called a 1099,
et cetera, okay.
And so for all countries including the United States,
please see this gray box here, okay,
on the tax filing organizer,
the organizer tab for helpful tax related internet addresses
that you can click on, and hopefully they're helpful.
And if they're ever incorrect for whatever country
you're in, let me know, I'll change it immediately.
Okay.
And you should not have to ask for any
of the aforementioned tax documents I mentioned,
because they should've already been sent to you.
But just in case you didn't receive them,
just follow up and complete this box here
that you received them, okay.
And as a quick side note, per this U.S. example
of a tax form, you will see where to put
in the W-2 tax information, okay.
And this is the pink form I showed you before
and this is just a close-up of it.
Lastly, at the bottom here
of your tax filing document one-pager,
I have a line listed for your financial goals,
like paying off student debts
or paying off a house by what year.
And I also included a line with the location
of your files on a computer, if they're on a computer.
And I wrote here Blue Western Digital Drive.
Okay, we're all different.
By the way, if you wanna secure your Excel file
in this course, right, 'cause it has a lot
of your sensitive information in it,
remember I didn't ask for your last name,
only your first name or nickname early on.
But what you can do is you can click
on this secure file button here,
okay and just kind of keep your Excel documents
on your computer only and not on the cloud, please, okay.
Identity theft is a massive issue
and we're gonna cover how to make sure
you are not a victim of identity theft
later in the course in this lecture here, okay.
Next up down here, we have
a line item that calculates your net worth
by taking your year end assets minus
your year end liabilities.
We discussed how to calculate your net worth
when we talked about your balance sheet
in exercise seven, okay.
And tracking your net worth is a really good thing to track
from one year to the next to make sure
that your net worth is increasing
as you get closer to your financial goals, okay.
So, below your net worth here,
we have your year end total savings meaning
all savings you have, okay.
Then just write down this amount here, okay,
how much is in your retirement savings account
et cetera, okay.
And the reason I do this is eventually
you're gonna have a bunch of boxes side by side,
I don't know if you can see that,
but I wrote black on black 2017,
you can see these numbers here.
And you'll be able to go back and kind of look at
how you're doing each year based on this snapshot here.
Okay.
Again, it's good to document all this stuff
so you ensure that you're increasing
the amount of money you've saved
from one year to the next, okay.
And then below that line item, please enter
in the date that you filed your taxes.
I've not filed mine yet,
that's why it's blank, okay.
The date that you filed your taxes
and the dollar or currency amount
that you expect either have to pay in additional taxes,
or how much you expect to receive via a tax refund.
It's good to track this, okay.
By the way that card there is from Monopoly.
I was in the Toys R Us store here with my son Matthew
when he was four, and he saw the Monopoly board game
on the shelf in the store, he said,
"Dad, look, they're now making
"non-iPad version of Monopoly."
Okay, sorry, moving on.
At the bottom of the form we had the actually tax refunds
or payments that you received or paid.
And we are done with this year's taxes,
then just file the accordion box away in storage
and just start a new box for the new year, okay,
and print out another form
like the one I showed you to stick on here.
And you put them all stack up like this, okay.
And it's actually quite fun to do and I like it.
And the kids help out with this too, it's fun, it's fun.
So a couple more tips.
When you receive any bill or statement in the mail,
I recommend placing them in a folder
that looks like this, okay.
And you can buy these really cheap online.
This one cracked, unfortunately, but it's a, yeah, anyway.
So, and what you do is this.
You put the bills here, okay.
And you do not put them into your accordion file
or folder there until you've read the statement, right
and looked for errors.
As you get overcharged all the time
on credit card statements, okay.
And maybe what you could do, if you want,
is set a weekly alarm on your phone
on like a Saturday morning to remind you
to pay the bills, okay,
and to look through the statements
while you enjoy your homemade
and lower cost cup of coffee or tea.
And once you've actually gone through them, right,
and Christine and I will go through this,
and sometimes I won't know,
has she done yet, have I done yet?
And that's why we like to put them in here first
before letting them graduate
or move up to the accordion box.
And what you can do is you can actually get a stamp
and you can get a stamp that's called
Review the Document or one called Paid.
And I actually bought this,
I think I got this from Office Depot, it's just a red stamp.
And it basically what you do is
once you've gone through a bill and paid it,
you just click this red stamp thing
and it looks like that, hi, I'm seven.
Anyway, that's what it looks like, right.
Remember when you used to get in the night club,
they used to stamp on me, where, anyway.
Anyway,
and it's important to do this, because
one late payment, just one late payment
can not only cost you a lot of money
in interest related penalty payments,
but it can also really hurt you in your credit rating
which might mean you won't get a loan to buy a house
because of one, and yes, I mean one late payment.
Right, it's crazy.
And I'm gonna discuss your credit score,
your credit rating, how to improve your credit rating
later in the course in this lecture here.
And again, we got the kids to kind of help out
with this stuff and they love using this stamp thing
and my older two sons, Andrew and Matthew,
and Dillon, poor guy, he was sleeping,
and we did this to him.
So it wasn't me, I promise you.
All right, lastly, put warranties in the accordion as well,
if you get them.
And just always think about in hindsight,
what year did I buy that appliance?
Oh yeah, it was 2015.
Okay, then the warranty information
is gonna be in the 2015 box.
And one little side note about warranties,
don't ever, ever, ever buy extended warranties
on any lower price electronics item.
It's usually a ripoff, right?
Amazon started to do this, too.
They're starting to actually have popups saying,
wait, before you buy this product,
do you want an extended warranty?
Okay, all right, good.
So we're done now with the offline tax organizing system.
Okay, and if you have any questions on how to do this
or better ideas, then please share it
with the rest of us or let me know.
And so in the next lecture I'm gonna outline
some really cool online apps and websites
that you can use to
manage your finances.
Although you know I prefer doing everything
on my computer for security reasons.
So if you do use software, I recommend using software
that only runs on your computer.
We're gonna cover this in a lot more detail very soon.
You know, before we end this lecture,
I mentioned writing down your short financial goals
in this section, in the bottom section here in the course.
And anybody that I've ever met
that's extraordinarily successful
has written down their goals.
Just remember nobody's smarter than you,
especially when you write down your goals.
I know it's a little bit out there,
but I really do believe it.
And if you haven't already watched the Steve Jobs video
called Nobody Is Smarter Than You,
then please do so at this link.
Thanks, and I'll see you in the next lecture.